Was that the King that spurredhis horse so hard
Against the steep uprisingof the hill?
I know not; but I think itwas not he.
Whoe'er a' was, a' show'da mounting mind.
Well, lords, to-day weshall have our dispatch:
On Saturday we will returnto France.
Then, forester, my friend,where is the bush
That we must stand andplay the murderer in?
Hereby, upon the edge ofyonder coppice;
A stand where you may makethe fairest shoot.
But come, the bow: nowmercy goes to kill,
The poor deer's blood, thatmy heart means no ill.
Here comes a member of thecommonwealth.
God dig-you-den all! Prayyou, which is the head lady?
Thou shalt know her, fellow, bythe others that have no heads.
Which is the greatestlady, the highest?
The thickest and thetallest.
The thickest and the tallest!it is so; truth is truth.
An your waist, mistress,were as slender as my wit,
One o' these maids' girdlesfor your waist should be fit.
Are not you the chief woman?you are the thickest here.
What's your will, sir?what's your will?
I have a letter from MonsieurBiron to one Lady Rosaline.
O, thy letter, thy letter!he's a good friend of mine:
Stand aside, good bearer.Boyet, you can carve;
Break up this capon.
I am bound to serve.
This letter is mistook, itimporteth none here;
It is writ to Jaquenetta.
We will read it, I swear.
Break the neck of the wax,and every one give ear.
'By heaven, that thou artfair, is most infallible;
true, that thou artbeauteous; truth itself,
that thou art lovely.More fairer than fair,
beautiful than beauteous,truer than truth itself,
have commiseration onthy heroical vassal!
The magnanimous and mostillustrate king Cophetua set
eye upon the pernicious andindubitate beggar Zenelophon;
and he it was thatmight rightly say,
Veni, vidi, vici; which toannothanize in the vulgar,
--O base and obscurevulgar!--videlicet,
He came, saw, and overcame:he came, one; saw two;
overcame, three. Whocame? the king:
why did he come? to see: whydid he see? to overcome:
to whom came he? to thebeggar: what saw he?
the beggar: who overcamehe? the beggar.
The conclusion is victory:on whose side? the king's.
The captive is enriched:on whose side?
the beggar's. The catastropheis a nuptial: on whose side?
the king's: no, on bothin one, or one in both.
I am the king; for sostands the comparison:
thou the beggar; for sowitnesseth thy lowliness.
What shalt thouexchange for rags? robes;
for tittles? titles;for thyself? me.
Thus, expecting thy reply, Iprofane my lips on thy foot,
my eyes on thy picture. andmy heart on thy every part.
Thine, in the dearestdesign of industry,
DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO.'
What plume of feathers is hethat indited this letter?
What vane? what weathercock?did you ever hear better?
I am much deceived but Iremember the style.
Else your memory is bad,going o'er it erewhile.
This Armado is a Spaniard,that keeps here in court;
A phantasime, a Monarcho,and one that makes sport
To the prince and hisbookmates.
Thou fellow, a word:
Who gave thou this letter?
I told you; my lord.
To whom shouldst thou giveit?
From my lord to my lady.
From which lord to whichlady?
From my lord Biron, a goodmaster of mine,
To a lady of France thathe call'd Rosaline.
Thou hast mistaken hisletter. Come, lords, away.
Here, sweet, put up this:'twill be thine another day.
Who is the suitor? who isthe suitor?
Shall I teach you to know?
Ay, my continent ofbeauty.
Why, she that bears thebow.
Finely put off!
My lady goes to killhorns; but, if thou marry,
Hang me by the neck, ifhorns that year miscarry.
Finely put on!
Well, then, I am theshooter.
And who is your deer?
If we choose by the horns,yourself come not near.
Finely put on, indeed!
You still wranglewith her, Boyet,
and she strikes at the brow.
But she herself is hitlower: have I hit her now?
Shall I come upon theewith an old saying,
that was a man when King Pepinof France was a little boy,
as touching the hit it?
So I may answer theewith one as old,
that was a woman when QueenGuinover of Britain was
a little wench, astouching the hit it.
Thou canst not hit it, hitit, hit it,
Thou canst not hit it, mygood man.
An I cannot, cannot,cannot,
An I cannot, another can.
O' my troth, most sweet jests!most incony vulgar wit!
When it comes so smoothlyoff, so obscenely,
as it were, so fit.
Very reverend sport, truly;
and done in the testimonyof a good conscience.
The deer was, as youknow, sanguis, in blood;
ripe as the pomewater, whonow hangeth like a jewel in
the ear of caelo, the sky,the welkin, the heaven;
and anon falleth like acrab on the face of terra,
the soil, the land, theearth.
Truly, Master Holofernes,the epithets are sweetly
varied, like a scholarat the least:
but, sir, I assure ye, it wasa buck of the first head.
Sir Nathaniel, haud credo.
'Twas not a haud credo;'twas a pricket.
Most barbarous intimation!yet a kind of insinuation,
as it were, in via, inway, of explication;
facere, as it were, replication,or rather,
ostentare, as itwere, to show, his inclination,
after his undressed,unpolished,
uneducated, unpruned,untrained, or rather,
unlettered, or ratherest,unconfirmed fashion,
to insert again my haudcredo for a deer.
I said the deer was not ahaud credo; twas a pricket.
Twice-sod simplicity, hiscoctus!
O thou monster Ignorance,how deformed dost thou look!
Sir, he hath never fed ofthe dainties that are bred
in a book; he hath noteat paper, as it were;
he hath not drunk ink: hisintellect is not replenished;
he is only an animal, onlysensible in the duller parts:
And such barren plantsare set before us,
that we thankful should be,
Which we of taste and knowledgeare, for those parts which
do fructify in us morethan he.
For as it would illbecome me to be vain,
indiscreet, or a fool,
So were there a patchset on learning,
to see him in a school:But omne bene, say I;
being of an old father's mind,
Many can brook the weatherthat love not the wind.
You two are book-men: canyou tell me by your wit
What was a month oldat Cain's birth,
that's not fiveweeks old as yet?
Dictynna, goodman Dull;Dictynna, goodman Dull.
What is Dictynna?
A title to Phoebe, toLuna, to the moon.
The moon was a month oldwhen Adam was no more,
And raught not to five weekswhen he came to five-score.
The allusion holds in theexchange.
'Tis true indeed; the collusionholds in the exchange.
God comfort thycapacity! I say,
the allusion holdsin the exchange.
And I say, the pollusionholds in the exchange;
for the moon is neverbut a month old:
and I say beside that,
'twas a pricket thatthe princess killed.
Sir Nathaniel, will youhear an extemporal epitaph
on the death of the deer?
And, to humour the ignorant,
call I the deer theprincess killed a pricket.
Perge, good MasterHolofernes, perge;
so it shall please youto abrogate scurrility.
I will something affect theletter, for it argues facility.
The preyful princessprick'd and pierced
a prettypleasing pricket;
Some say a sore;but not a sore,
till now made sorewith shooting.
The dogs did yell:put L to sore,
then sorel jumps from thicket;
Or pricket sore, or else sorel;the people fall a-hooting.
If sore be sore, then L to soremakes fifty sores one sorel.
Of one sore I an hundred makeby adding but one more L.
A rare talent!
This is a gift that Ihave, simple, simple;
a foolish extravagant spirit,full of forms, figures,
shapes, objects, ideas,apprehensions, motions,
revolutions: these are begotin the ventricle of memory,
nourished in thewomb of pia mater,
and delivered upon themellowing of occasion.
But the gift is good inthose in whom it is acute,
and I am thankful for it.
Sir, I praise the Lord for you;and so may my parishioners;
for their sons arewell tutored by you,
and their daughters profitvery greatly under you:
you are a good memberof the commonwealth.
Mehercle, if theirsons be ingenuous,
they shall want no instruction;if their daughters be capable,
I will put it to them: but virsapit qui pauca loquitur;
Good master Parson, be sogood as read me this letter:
it was given me by Costard,and sent me from Don Armado:
I beseech you, read it.
Fauste, precor gelida quandopecus omne sub umbra
Ruminat,--and so forth.Ah, good old Mantuan!
I may speak of thee as thetraveller doth of Venice;
Venetia, Venetia,
Chi non ti vede non tipretia.
Old Mantuan, old Mantuan!who understandeth thee not,
loves thee not. Ut,re, sol, la, mi, fa.
Under pardon, sir, whatare the contents?
or rather, as Horace says inhis--What, my soul, verses?
Ay, sir, and very learned.
Let me hear a staff, a stanze,a verse; lege, domine.
If knowledge be the mark,to know thee shall suffice;
Well learned is that tonguethat well can thee commend,
All ignorant that soul thatsees thee without wonder;
Which is to me some praisethat I thy parts admire:
Thy eye Jove's lightning bears,thy voice his dreadful thunder,
Which not to anger bent,is music and sweet fire.
Celestial as thou art, O,pardon, love, this wrong,
That sings heaven's praisewith such an earthly tongue.
You do not find the apostraphas,and so miss the accent:
let me supervise the canzonet.
Here are only numbers ratified;but, for the elegancy,
facility, and goldencadence of poesy, caret.
Ovidius Naso was the man:and why, indeed, Naso,
Don't know.
For smelling out theodouriferous flowers of fancy,
the jerks of invention?Imitari is nothing:
so doth the hound hismaster, the ape his keeper,
the tired horse his rider.But, damosella virgin,
was this directed to you?
Ay, sir.
I will overglancethe superscript:
'To the snow-white hand of themost beauteous Lady Rosaline.'
I will look again on theintellect of the letter,
for the nomination ofthe party writing
to the person written unto:
'Your ladyship's in alldesired employment, .'
Biron.
Ohhh
Sir Nathaniel, this Biron is oneof the votaries with the king;
and here he hathframed a letter
to a sequent of thestranger queen's,
which accidentally, or bythe way of progression,
hath miscarried. Tripand go, my sweet;
deliver this paper into theroyal hand of the king:
it may concern much. Staynot thy compliment;
I forgive thy duty; adieu.
Sir, you have done this in thefear of God, very religiously;
and, as a certainfather saith,--
Sir tell me not of thefather;
But to return to theverses:
Sir Nathaniel. Did they pleaseyou?
Marvellous well for thepen.
I do dine to-day at the father'sof a certain pupil of mine;
where, if, beforerepast, it shall please
you to gratify thetable with a grace,
I will undertake,
on my privilege I have with theparents of the foresaid child
or pupil, your ben venuto;
where I will show thoseverses to be very unlearned,
savouring neither of poetry,wit, nor invention:
I beseech your society.
And thank you too; forsociety, saith the text,
is the happiness of life.
I will not love:
if I do, hang me; i' faith,I will not. O, but her eye,
--by this light, but for hereye, I would not love her;
yes, for her two eyes.Well, I do nothing
in the world but lie,and lie in my throat.
By heaven, I do love: andit hath taught me to rhyme
and to be melancholy; andhere is part of my rhyme,
and here my melancholy.Here comes one with a paper:
Ay me!
Shot, by heaven!
So sweet a kiss the golden sun
gives not to those freshmorning drops upon the rose,
As thy eye-beams, whentheir fresh rays have smote
The night of dew that onmy cheeks down flows:
Nor shines the silver moonone half so bright
Through the transparentbosom of the deep,
As doth thy face throughtears of mine give light;
What, Longaville! andreading! listen, ear.
Now, in thy likeness, onemore fool appear!
Ay me, I am forsworn!
In love, I hope: sweetfellowship in shame!
O sweet Maria, empress ofmy love!
Did not the heavenlyrhetoric of thine eye,
'Gainst whom the worldcannot hold argument,
Persuade my heart to thisfalse perjury?
Vows for thee brokedeserve not punishment.
A woman I forswore; but Iwill prove,
Thou being a goddess, Iforswore not thee:
My vow was earthly, thou aheavenly love;
Thy grace being gain'dcures all disgrace in me.
Vows are but breath, andbreath a vapour is:
Then thou, fair sun, whichon my earth dost shine,
Exhalest this vapour-vow;in thee it is:
If broken then, it is nofault of mine:
If by me broke, what foolis not so wise
To lose an oath to win aparadise?
This is the liver-vein,which makes flesh a deity,
A green goose a goddess:pure, pure idolatry.
By whom shall I sendthis?--Company! stay.
All hid, all hid; an oldinfant play.
O most divine Kate!
O most profane coxcomb!
O that I had my wish!
And I had mine!
And I mine too, good Lord!
Amen, so I had mine: isnot that a good word?
Like a fever shereigns in my blood
and will remember'd be.
Once more I'll read theode that I have writ.
Once more I'll mark howlove can vary wit.
On a day--alack the day!--
Love, whose month is everMay,
Spied a blossom passingfair
Playing in the wanton air:
Through the velvet leavesthe wind,
All unseen, can passagefind;
That the lover, sick todeath,
Wish himself the heaven'sbreath.
Air, quoth he, thy cheeksmay blow;
Air, would I might triumphso!
But, alack, my hand issworn
Ne'er to pluck thee fromthy thorn;
Vow, alack, for youthunmeet,
Youth so apt to pluck asweet!
Do not call it sin in me,
That I am forsworn forthee;
Thou for whom Jove wouldswear
Juno but an Ethiope were;
And deny himself for Jove,
Turning mortal for thylove.
This will I send, andsomething else more plain,
That shall express my truelove's fasting pain.
O, would the king, Biron,and Longaville,
Were lovers too! Ill, toexample ill,
Would from my foreheadwipe a perjured note;
For none offend where allalike do dote.
Dumain, thy love isfar from charity
that in love's griefdesires a society.
You may look pale, but Ishould blush, I know,
To be o'erheard andtaken napping so.
You blush; ashis your case is such;
You chide at him,offending twice as much;
You do not love Maria;Longaville
Did never sonnet for hersake compile,
Nor never lay his wreathedarms athwart
His loving bosom to keepdown his heart.
I have been closelyshrouded in this book
And mark'd you both andfor you both did look:
I heard your guilty rhymes,noted well your fashion,
Saw sighs reek from you,observed your passion:
Ay me! says one; O Jove!the other cries;
One, her hairs were gold,crystal the other's eyes:
You would for paradisebreak faith, and troth;
And Jove, for your love,would infringe an oath.
What will Biron say whenthat he shall hear
Faith so infringed, whichsuch zeal did swear?
How will he scorn! howwill he spend his wit!
How will he triumph, leapand laugh at it!
For all the wealth thatever I did see,
I would not have him knowso much by me.
Now step I forth to whiphypocrisy.
Ah, good my liege, I praythee, pardon me!
Good heart, what gracehast thou, thus to reprove
These worms for loving,that art most in love?
Your eyes do make nocoaches; in your tears
There is no certainprincess that appears;
You'll not be perjured,'tis a hateful thing;
Tush, none but minstrelslike of sonneting!
But are you not ashamed?nay, are you not,
All three of you, to bethus much o'ershot?
You found his mote; theking your mote did see;
But I a beam do find ineach of three.
O, what a scene of fooleryhave I seen,
Of sighs, of groans, ofsorrow and of teen!
O me, with what strictpatience have I sat,
To see a king transformedto a gnat!
To see great Herculeswhipping a gig,
And profound Solomon totune a jig,
And Nestor play atpush-pin with the boys,
And critic Timon laugh atidle toys!
Where lies thy grief, O,tell me, good Dumain?
And gentle Longaville,where lies thy pain?
And where my liege's? allabout the breast:
A caudle, ho!
Too bitter is thy jest.
Are we betray'd thus tothy over-view?
Not you to me, but Ibetray'd by you:
I, that am honest; I, thathold it sin
To break the vow I amengaged in;
I am betray'd, by keepingcompany
With moon like men, men ofinconstancy.
When shall you see mewrite a thing in rhyme?
Or groan for Joan? orspend a minute's time
In pruning me? When shallyou hear that I
Will praise a hand, afoot, a face, an eye,
A gait, a state, a brow, abreast, a waist,
A leg, a limb?
Soft! whither away sofast?
A true man or a thief thatgallops so?
I post from love: goodlover, let me go.
God bless the king!
What present hast thouthere?
Some certain treason.
What makes treason here?
I beseech your grace, letthis letter be read:
Our parson misdoubts it;'twas treason, he said.
Biron, read it over.
Where hadst thou it?
Of Costard.
How now! what is in you?why dost thou tear it?
A toy, my liege, a toy: yourgrace needs not fear it.
It did move him to passion,and therefore let's hear it.
It is Biron's writing,and here is his name.
Ah, you whoreson loggerhead!
you were born to do me shame.
Guilty, my leige, guilty! Iconfess, I confess.
What?
That you three fools lack'dme fool to make up the mess:
He, he, and you, and you,my liege, and I,
Are pick-purses in love,and we deserve to die.
O, dismiss this audience,and I shall tell you more.
Now the number is even.
True, true; we are four.
Will these turtles begone?
Hence, sirs; away!
Walk aside the true folk,and let the traitors stay.
Sweet lords, sweet lovers,O, let us embrace!
As true we are as fleshand blood can be:
The sea will ebb and flow,heaven show his face;
Young blood can not obeyan old decree:
What, did these rent linesshow some love of thine?
Did they, quoth you? Whosees the heavenly Rosaline,
That, like a rude andsavage man of Inde,
At the first opening ofthe gorgeous east,
Bows not his vassal headand strucken blind
Kisses the base groundwith obedient breast?
What peremptoryeagle-sighted eye
Dares look upon the heavenof her brow,
That is not blinded by hermajesty?
What zeal, what fury hathinspired thee now?
My love, her mistress, isa gracious moon;
She an attending star,scarce seen a light.
My eyes are then no eyes,nor I Biron:
O, but for my love, daywould turn to night!
O, 'tis the sun thatmaketh all things shine.
By heaven, thy love isblack as ebony.
Is ebony like her? O wooddivine!
A wife of such wood werefelicity.
O, who can give an oath?where is a book?
That I may swear beautydoth beauty lack,
If that she learn not ofher eye to look:
No face is fair that isnot full so black.
O paradox! Black is thebadge of hell,
The hue of dungeons andthe school of night;
And beauty's crest becomesthe heavens well.
To look like her arechimney-sweepers black.
And since her time arecolliers counted bright.
And Ethiopes of theirsweet complexion crack.
Dark needs no candles now,for dark is light.
Your mistresses dare nevercome in rain,
For fear their coloursshould be wash'd away.
'Twere good, yours did; for,sir, to tell you plain,
I'll find a fairer facenot wash'd to-day.
I'll prove her fair, ortalk till doomsday here.
No devil will fright theethen so much as she.
I never knew man hold vilestuff so dear.
Look, here's thy love: myfoot and her face see.
O, if the streets werepaved with thine eyes,
Her feet were much toodainty for such tread!
O, vile! then, as shegoes, what upward lies
The street should see asshe walk'd overhead.
But what of this? are wenot all in love?
Nothing so sure; andtherefore all forsworn.
Then leave this chat; and,good Biron, now prove
Our loving lawful, and ourfaith not torn.
Ay, marry, there; someflattery for this evil.
O, some authority how toproceed;
Some tricks, some quillets,how to cheat the devil.
Some salve for perjury.
'Tis more than need.
Have at you, then,affection's men at arms.
Consider what you firstdid swear unto,
To fast, to study, and tosee no woman;
Flat treason 'gainst thekingly state of youth.
Say, can you fast? yourstomachs are too young;
And abstinence engendersmaladies.
O, we have made a vow to study,lords,
And in that vow we haveforsworn our books.
For when would you, myliege, or you, or you,
In leaden contemplationhave found out
Such fiery numbers as theprompting eyes
Of beauty's tutors haveenrich'd you with?
Other slow arts entirelykeep the brain;
And therefore, findingbarren practisers,
Scarce show a harvest oftheir heavy toil:
But love, first learned ina lady's eyes,
Lives not alone immured inthe brain;
But, with the motion ofall elements,
Courses as swift asthought in every power,
And gives to every power adouble power,
Above their functions andhis offices.
It adds a precious seeingto the eye;
A lover's eyes will gazean eagle blind;
A lover's ear will hearthe lowest sound,
When the suspicious headof theft is stopp'd:
Love's feeling is moresoft and sensible
Than are the tender hornsof cockl'd snails;
Love's tongue proves daintyBacchus gross in taste:
For valour, is not Love aHercules,
Still climbing trees inthe Hesperides?
Subtle as Sphinx; as sweetand musical
As bright Apollo's lute,strung with his hair:
And when Love speaks, thevoice of all the gods
Makes heaven drowsy withthe harmony.
Never durst poet touch apen to write
Until his ink were temper'dwith Love's sighs;
O, then his lines wouldravish savage ears
And plant in tyrants mildhumility.
From women's eyes thisdoctrine I derive:
They sparkle still theright Promethean fire;
They are the books, thearts, the academes,
That show, contain andnourish all the world:
Else none at all in oughtproves excellent.
Then fools you were thesewomen to forswear,
Or keeping what is sworn,you will prove fools.
For wisdom's sake, a wordthat all men love,
Or for love's sake, a wordthat loves all men,
Or for men's sake, theauthors of these women,
Or women's sake, by whomwe men are men,
Let us once lose our oathsto find ourselves,
Or else we lose ourselvesto keep our oaths.
It is religion to be thusforsworn,
For charity itselffulfills the law,
And who can sever lovefrom charity?
Saint Cupid, then! and,soldiers, to the field!
Advance your standards,and upon them, lords;
Pell-mell, down with them!but be first advised,
In conflict that you getthe sun of them.
Now to plain-dealing; laythese glozes by:
Shall we resolve to woothese girls of France?
And win them too:therefore let us devise
Some entertainment forthem in their tents.
First, from the park letus conduct them thither;
Then homeward every manattach the hand
Of his fair mistress: inthe afternoon
We will with some strangepastime solace them,
Such as the shortness ofthe time can shape;
For revels, dances, masksand merry hours
Forerun fair Love, strewingher way with flowers.